---
title: Waves
published: 2009-01-01
layout: default
keywords: ruby waves open-source frameworks web applications architecture
---
h2. What Is Waves?

Waves is an open-source (MIT License) Ruby Web framework for Web applications.

Today's Web applications must embrace a wide variety of scenarios that don't really fit the Sun MVC paradigm that has dominated Web-based application architecture in the past. Think Ajax, Adobe Air, mashups, OpenID, rich-client mobile apps, and so on.

Waves helps you meet these challenges by providing a rich DSL for dealing with HTTP instead of trying to hide it from you. Waves Resource classes are faster and more flexible than Rails-style routing. And our mixin approach provides just the architectural magic that your applications need, and nothing more.

h2. Is Waves Under Active Development?

Yes. Development has been slow recently but should pick up soon.

h2.  Try It Out

Waves is currently at version @0.9.3@. (You'll need "gemcutter":gemcutter.)

<pre>
sudo gem install waves
waves generate -t classic -n myapp
cd myapp
waves server
</pre>

h2. On The Web

* "Code":http://github.com/waves
* "Reference":http://waves.rubyforge.org
* "Discussion":http://groups.google.com/group/rubywaves
* "Chat: #waves on irc.freenode.net":irc://irc.freenode.net/waves

[gemcutter]http://gemcutter.org

h2. Presentations On Waves

I've given enough talks on Waves now that it seems worthwhile making it easier to find them. Fortunately, "Coby Randquist":http://www.confreaks.com/ has basically been stalking me (or, possibly, vice-versa, hard to say which) and, as a result, all of my talks are available on-line. In order of recent-ness:

* "GoRuCo 2009":http://goruco2009.confreaks.com/30-may-2009-12-50-resource-oriented-architecture-with-waves-dan-yoder.html
* "LA RubyConf 2009":http://larubyconf2009.confreaks.com/04-apr-2009-10-10-resource-oriented-architecture-and-why-it-matters-and-how-waves-make-it-easier-dan-yoder.html 
* "RubyConf 2008":http://rubyconf2008.confreaks.com/waves-a-resource-oriented-framework.html
* "LoneStar RubyConf 2008":http://lsrc2008.confreaks.com/11-dan-yoder-resource-driven-web-development-with-waves.html