---
title: Native Apps Are Dead
author: Dan Yoder
excerpt: |-
  I've often found it curious how often technologists - whose very job is to create disruptive innovation - evince a touching faith in the status quo. A recent example of this phenomena is the debate about native apps versus Web apps. Over the past fifteen years, Web apps have become increasingly powerful, to the point where, for some types of applications, they are nearly indistinguishable from conventional "native" applications. This is, at best, a silly debate, and, at worst, misleading.
layout: blog-post
published: 2011-06-05
---
I've often found it curious how often technologists - whose very job is to create disruptive innovation - evince a touching faith in the status quo. A recent example of this phenomena is the debate about native apps versus Web apps. Over the past fifteen years, Web apps have become increasingly powerful, to the point where, for some types of applications, they are nearly indistinguishable from conventional "native" applications. This is, at best, a silly debate, and, at worst, misleading.

Before we go any further, let's be clear on the terminology. A Web application runs with the help of a Web browser. In fact, it cannot be run without one. A native application, in this context, is a compiled binary that runs with the help of the underlying operating system. A browser itself is a native application. Bottom line: there's one additional layer of stuff between Web applications and the operating system. 

Why does this matter? Well, one obvious implication is that Web applications are intrinsically slower because applications have to make a call into the browser, which in turn must make a call into the operating system. The response to that call, say to check your location on a mobile phone, must then be relayed from the operating system to the browser and then, finally, to the original application that made the call.

There are other difficulties as well. The conventions that operating systems use for a given action, such as navigation or scrolling, are often subtly different than those used in Web applications. Integrating with certain features of the operating system, such as the camera, may be more difficult when using a Web application. Memory is greater in Web applications, if for no other reason than there's also a browser being loaded. And so on.

So why do I say that it's a silly, or even misleading debate? On the face of it, native applications have clear advantages of Web applications, don't they?

One problem with the debate is that it's a false dichotomy, since you can embed a Web browser within a native application. And, conversely, you can extend an embedded Web browser to provide access to native APIs. The two alternatives have not been mutually exclusive for years now.

Remember, Web applications have some pretty compelling selling points themselves. For one thing, there's the appeal of writing code that will run on a variety of different devices, ranging from mobile phones, to tablets, to laptops, even to gaming consoles. Virtually every major device platform now sports a Web browser, and it can often been discreetly embedded within a native application.

For another, much of this code can be tested using a Web browser, which makes it possible to more easily automate the testing. It's also easier to find Web developers than it is to find native developers. And you only need one team of them rather than a separate team for each device you want to support.

At least, that's the appeal. In practice, as we've seen, we can't always realize this hacker utopia. What we can do, however, is have the best of both worlds by using embedded Web applications. One of the most popular early attempts to do this is called PhoneGap, but there are more and more variations on this theme emerging. We are entering a world where you can mix and match native with Web technologies based on your specific requirements.

But that's just the start. The capabilities of mobile and tablet devices are going to continue to improve rapidly. Not only that, but both of the major operating systems vendors in this area, Apple and Google, have every incentive to make their Web browsers more and more powerful. And _not only that_, but both share a common open source codebase that can be, and often is, extended and enhanced by thousands of Web developers.

In just the past year, we've seen advances in Web browsers ranging from improved security to hardware accelerated animations to drag-and-drop support. We need only extrapolate the curve a year or two forward to see that there will be less and less need to incur the added expense of building native applications. What's more, the various frameworks to support integrating Web applications with the native capabilities provided by the operating system will _also_ continue to improve, compounding the impact of better Web browsers. It may take a year or two, but it's inevitable that most native applications will eventually be Web applications under the covers.

We've already seen this happen with scripting languages like PHP, Ruby, and Python. Writing Web application servers in C++ or Java is slowly becoming arcane. Why did this happen? For the same reasons embedded Web applications will become the norm: the hardware and operating systems got better, and the various scripting languages got better at the same time. Today, even a site like Facebook uses PHP for much of its functionality. And, not surprisingly, they use a Web application for their mobile client.

At Border Stylo, we've tried to push the envelope a bit with our first hybrid mobile app, Retrollect. What makes Retrollect interesting is that it is very image-intensive, employs cutting edge interactive animations, and has multiple points of integration with native features not available in the standard mobile browsers. These are precisely the kinds of features you would normally associate with native applications. While the result wasn't perfect - we're considering going ahead with a fully native version, based on consumer feedback - and it wasn't easy, but we came pretty close. It's going to be interesting to see how many of the problems we've encountered are resolved over the next year or two.

As technologists, we need to look towards the future, not the past. Native applications are dead. Long live native applications (which run embedded Web applications)!